---
layout: post
title:  "Discussion 2"
date:   2016-09-08 11:00:00
categories: disc
---

# Links  
[Attendance and feedback](http://tiny.cc/tammy-disc02)  
[Slides](https://docs.google.com/a/berkeley.edu/presentation/d/1gg8jKn3-bIQ6ziJds53cb3WxhEeY0yazm_tW7cHua5c/edit?usp=sharing)  

---

# Problems  
  
## Question 1  

{% highlight python %}
def decrement(x):
    return x - 1

def half(x):
    return x // 2

def decrease_to_one(f, n):
    i = 0
    while n > 1:
        n = f(n)
        i += 1
    return i
{% endhighlight %}


How many call frames are opened if you call `decrease_to_one(decrement, 5)`? What about `decrease_to_one(half, 8)`?

<a class="btn btn-default solution-toggle-2">TOGGLE SOLUTION</a>

<blockquote class="solution-2">The initial call to <code>decrease_to_one</code> will open a frame. In the body of <code>decrease_to_one</code>, <code>f</code> is called until <code>n</code> reaches <code>1</code>. So the question is, how many times does it take to reach <code>1</code> from <code>n</code> by calling <code>f</code> on it? For <code>decrease_to_one(decrement, 5)</code>, it'll take 4 calls to <code>f</code> (<code>f(5)</code>, <code>f(4)</code>, <code>f(3)</code>, <code>f(2)</code>), and for <code>decrease_to_one(half, 8)</code>, it'll take 3 calls to <code>f</code> (<code>f(8)</code>, <code>f(4)</code>, <code>f(2)</code>). Each of these calls requires a new frame, so the answers are <b>5</b> and <b>4</b>.
</blockquote>

 
## Question 2  

Fill in the blanks below so that the output is as follows.

{% highlight python %}
>>> def bern(ie):
...     def san(ders):
...         return ie("It is unacceptable that " + ders)
...     return san
>>> def hill(ary):
...     print(ary())
>>> hill(bern(____________________)(____________________))
It is unacceptable that women make less than men
{% endhighlight %}

<a class="btn btn-default solution-toggle">TOGGLE SOLUTION</a>

<blockquote class="solution">{% highlight python %}hill(bern(lambda x: lambda: x)("women make less than men")){% endhighlight %}
<br/><b>Explanation:</b> <br/>First, we see that the return value of <code>bern(____________)(____________)</code> is passed as an argument to <code>hill</code> and will be bound to the parameter <code>ary</code>. Notice that <code>ary</code> is being called with <b>no arguments</b> in the body of <code>hill</code>. That means that the entire expression <code>bern(____________)(____________)</code> must return a <b>zero-argument function</b>. <br/><br/>

Now let's analyze the call expression itself. First, we evaluate the operator: <code>bern(____________)</code>. This operator is itself a function call, and we know it must return a function. Well, that's already taken care of, because <code>bern</code>'s return value is always the function <code>san</code> regardless of the input. So what should we pass through to it? Notice that <code>bern</code>'s parameter <code>ie</code> is called on the string <code>"It is unacceptable that " + ders</code>. That must mean that our argument is a function, more specifically, a <b>one-argument lambda function</b>. So then we have this: 
{% highlight python %}bern(lambda x: ???)(____________){% endhighlight %}
Since I've named the lambda's parameter <code>x</code>, the entire string <code>"It is unacceptable that " + ders</code> will be bound to <code>x</code> when we execute this lambda. Keep in mind now that <code>lambda x: ???</code> will be bound to the parameter <code>ie</code>. 
<br/><br/>
Let's skip the lambda's body for now and move on what to put in the second set of parentheses. We've established that <code>bern(lambda x: ???)</code> will return <code>san</code>, so essentially <code>bern(lambda x: ???)(____________)</code> becomes <code>san(_________)</code>. Figuring out what to pass through to <code>san</code> is easy. We see that the parameter <code>ders</code> will be added to the string <code>"It is unacceptable that "</code>. This is the only place in our code where we can concatenate strings, so <code>ders</code> must be bound to <code>"women make less than men"</code>. So now all that's left is to write the body of the lambda: 
{% highlight python %}bern(lambda x: ???)("women make less than men"){% endhighlight %}
<br/>
Earlier I said that the entire expression above must return a <b>zero-argument function</b> that will be bound to <code>ary</code> inside of <code>hill</code>. How can we make that happen? Well the return value of that whole expression is actually just the return value of <code>san</code> (remember that <code>bern(lambda x: ???)(____________)</code> is basically <code>san(_________)</code>). <code>san</code> returns the value of <code>ie</code> called on <code>"It is unacceptable that " + ders</code>! Recall that <code>ie</code> is bound to the lambda function we already wrote in. Thus, for <code>san</code> to return a zero-arg function, our lambda must return a zero-arg function:
{% highlight python %}bern(lambda x: lambda: ???)("women make less than men"){% endhighlight %}

<br/>Let's regroup and go over what our "bindings" are so far. <code>ie</code> is bound to <code>lambda x: lambda: ???</code>. <code>ary</code> is bound to that inner lambda, <code>lambda: ???</code>. The parameter <code>x</code> to our first lambda will be bound to the string we want to print. <br/><br/>
Now, to figure out what that inner lambda should return, we must turn back to <code>hill</code>. Our desired action is to print the string that is bound to <code>x</code> in the first lambda. <code>hill</code> takes care of the printing for us; it prints the return value of <code>ary()</code>. That means that our inner zero-argument lambda must return the string we want to print, which is bound to the parameter <code>x</code> of the outer lambda function. This completes the solution:
{% highlight python %}bern(lambda x: lambda: x)("women make less than men"){% endhighlight %} <br/>

<b>Important note #1:</b> Throughout the explanation I said that certain variables are bound to <code>lambda ... : ...</code>. I do not that the variables are literally bound to those lambda expressions; it was simply a clean way to refer to certain functions. Remember than lambda expressions are just unevaluated expressions just like <code>2+4</code>. What I mean is that the variable is bound to the function object that that lambda expression creates. <br/><br/>
<b>Important note #2:</b> I don't expect you to read through this lengthy explanation and totally understand everything that's going on. For that reason I highly recommend drawing out the environment diagram. You can find the solution to the environment diagram <a href="http://pythontutor.com/composingprograms.html#code=def+bern(ie%29%3A%0A++++def+san(ders%29%3A%0A++++++++return+ie(%22It+is+unacceptable+that+%22+%2B+ders%29%0A++++return+san%0Adef+hill(ary%29%3A%0A++++print(ary(%29%29%0Ahill(bern(lambda+x%3A+lambda%3A+x%29(%22women+make+less+than+men%22%29%29&mode=display&origin=composingprograms.js&cumulative=true&py=3&rawInputLstJSON=%5B%5D&curInstr=19">here</a>.
</blockquote>

